Lactic acid bacteria are being consumed more frequently as awareness of their health benefits has increased. The industrial production of lactic acid bacteria requires a comprehensive understanding of their survival stress, especially regarding changes in metabolic substances in a glucose-limited environment. In the present study, a metabolomic approach was applied to investigate Lactobacillus casei Zhang using cultures from a common ancestor that were permitted to evolve under conditions with normal or glucose-restricted media for up to 4,000 generations. Metabolomic analyses of intracellular and extracellular differential metabolites under De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe broth (2% vol/vol glucose; Oxoid Ltd., Basingstoke, UK) and glucose-restricted (0.02% vol/vol glucose in De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe broth) conditions were performed at generations 0, 2,000, and 4,000 and revealed 23 different metabolites. Myristic acid, ergothioneine, Lys-Thr, and palmitamide contents exhibited significant reductions between 0 and 4,000 generations, whereas nicotinate, histidine, palmitic acid, l-lysine, urocanate, thymine, and other substances increased. The dynamics of the pathways involved in AA metabolism, including glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism, histidine metabolism, lysine degradation, and arginine and proline metabolism, were also a focus of the present study. There were also changes in several other metabolic pathways, including vitamin B6, thiamine, nicotinate, and nicotinamide, according to generation time. Additionally, in the present study we screened for key metabolites involved in the glucose-restricted response and provided a theoretical basis for comprehensively revealing the regulatory mechanisms associated with L. casei Zhang glucose restriction at the metabolic level. These findings also provide novel ideas and methods for analyzing the glucose-restricted stress response at the metabolic level.
30879813
Metabolomic analysis of significant changes in Lactobacillus casei Zhang during culturing to generation 4,000 under conditions of glucose restriction.
Journal of dairy science
2019
