The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of freezing diluents supplemented in three potential amines/amino acids, namely, antioxidant cysteamine (2-aminoethanethiol [AET]), ergothioneine (ERG), and serine (SER), in optimization of chicken sperm cryopreservation. The semen of 36 Pradu Hang Dum males, selected based on their motility vigor score, was frozen by a simple freezing method using nitrogen vapors and dimethylformamide (DMF). In a first experiment, a wide range of AET, ERG, and SER doses were tested. Semen quality was evaluated after incubation at 5°C or after cryopreservation in straws in the Blumberger Hahnen Sperma Verdünner (BHSV) diluent + DMF (6% v/v) with or without AET, ERG, or SER. The best targeted doses of AET, ERG, or SER were then selected for experiment 2 that was focused on cryopreserved semen. Frozen-thawed sperm quality was evaluated by different in vitro tests and by evaluation of fertility. Objective motility parameters were evaluated by computer-assisted sperm analysis. Membrane integrity, acrosome integrity, and mitochondria function were evaluated using appropriate dyes and flow cytometry. Lipid peroxide production was assessed by the thiobarbituric acid test (malondialdehyde production). Fertility obtained with frozen-thawed semen supplemented or not in AET, ERG, or SER was evaluated after artificial insemination of laying hens. ERG and AET decreased sperm lipid peroxidation and decreased fertility, even at low doses. The presence of 4 mmol of SER significantly decreased lipid peroxidation, increased the frozen-thawed sperm quality, and increased fertility after sperm cryopreservation (90% vs. control 84%, P < 0.05). In a third experiment, the use of 1 mmol of sucrose (the best result of our previous study) added to 4 mmol of SER-supplemented extender was tested. This addition allowed to the highest levels of fertility (93%). In conclusion, the addition of 4 mmol of SER in semen cryopreservation diluents decreases peroxidation and improves the efficiency of the process.
32029149
Different concentrations of cysteamine, ergothioneine, and serine modulate quality and fertilizing ability of cryopreserved chicken sperm.
Poultry science
2020
